docs/adr: add daser parallelization adr (#1096)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: docs/adr/adr-012-daser-parallelization.md

> # ADR #012: DAS'er parallelization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ADR #012: DASer parallelization
```

Not sure if `'` is needed here, I will defer to native speakers

## Changelog

- 2022-9-12: Started

## Authors

@walldiss

## Context

DAS is the process of verifying the availability of

> block data by sampling chunks or shares of those blocks. Package `das` implements an engine to confirm availability over the network's whole chain of blocks' data over the Availability interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
block data by sampling chunks or shares of those blocks. Package `das` implements an engine to persistently confirm availability over the chain of blocks' data via the `Availability` interface.
```

> Availability interface. High availability of shares is a priority functionality for celestia-node. Its performance could benefit a lot from parallelization optimisation to make it able to fully utilise network bandwidth.

Reviewer: What about something like this? 
> Package `das` implements an engine to confirm availability over the network's whole chain of blocks' data over the Availability interface.

> High availability of block data is a priority functionality for celestia-node.

> High availability of block data is a priority functionality for celestia-node. Its performance could benefit a lot from parallelization optimisation to make it able to fully utilise network bandwidth.

Author: Thank you, I've rephrased misleading part to  "verifying samples .. "

## Previous approach

> Shares sampling by its nature is a network bound operation that implies multiple network round-trips.
> Previous implementation of DAS'er was using single thread synchronous approach.
> Meaning there was only one process sequentially performing sampling operation over past headers, that was blocked by awaiting a for response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shares sampling, by its nature, is a network-bound operation that implies multiple network round-trips.
The previous implementation of DAS'er used a single-thread synchronous approach.
Meaning there was only one process sequentially performing sampling operations over past headers that were blocked by awaiting a response.
```
Just grammar fixes

## Decision

> Usage of multiple coordinated workers running in parallel could drastically improve DAS'er performance by better utilisation of network bandwidth. On the downside, solution brings concurrency complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using multiple coordinated workers running in parallel drastically improves DAS'er performance by better network bandwidth utilization. On the downside, solution brings concurrency complexity.
```

## Detailed Design

To achieve parallelization DAS'er was split into core components:

> 1. `Coordinator` holds all information about sampled headers and defines what headers should be sampled next.

Reviewer: should we change 'information about' to 'state of'?

> 2. `Workers` perform sampling over range of headers and communicate results back to coordinator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `Workers` perform sampling over a range of headers and communicate results back to the coordinator.
```

> 3. `Subscriber` subscribes to updates of network head. If new head is found it will notify the `Coordinator`. Recent network head blocks will be prioritised for sampling to increase availability of most demanded blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `Subscriber` subscribes to updates of network head. If a new head is found, it will notify the `Coordinator`. Recent network head blocks will be prioritized for sampling to increase the availability of the most demanded blocks.
```

> 3. `Subscriber` subscribes to updates of network head. If a new head is found, it will notify the `Coordinator`. Recent network head blocks will be prioritized for sampling to increase the availability of the most demanded blocks.

Reviewer: In the previous code, we had such prioritization, by the way, but implemented differently and implicitly. He made it explicit and unified with a general code path for sampling, which I believe introduced the complexity you are concerned with.

> 4. `CheckpointStore` stores / loads `Coordinator` state as a checkpoint to allow seamless resume upon restart. `Coordinator` will store state as checkpoint on exit and will resume sampling from the latest state.
> Also periodically stores checkpoint to storage in case node hard shutdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. `CheckpointStore` stores/loads` Coordinator` state as a checkpoint to allow seamless resume upon restart. `Coordinator` will store the state as a checkpoint on the exit and will resume sampling from the latest state.
Also periodically stores checkpoint to storage in case node hard shutdown.
```

> ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13818348/190365050-4a26bb1c-8951-4509-8768-0711f0dae7b1.png)

Reviewer: Nice diagram! Can you move into the `docs/img` dir?

Sampling flow:

1. `Coordinator` checks if worker concurrency limit is reached.

> 2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`

Reviewer 2: @derrandz can you look into the implementation.

> 2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`

Author: I've added section for value selection. This param could have different optimums for different setup, mainly depending on network latency and bandwidth. It will get better configuration in future so I mentioned it too. I think @Bidon15 had plans to do more detailed performance tests that will help to define more precise value.

> 2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`

Reviewer 2: I think another thing that is worth mentioning is that each worker takes in `samplingRange` heights.

> 2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`

Author: Added param description to the worker section

> 2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`

Reviewer 3: Catching up on this. As @walldiss mentioned, this value will change from a setup to another, thus we should make it configurable and provide recommended values per known standard setups, and offer some space for whoever thinks their setup can do better.

   1. Looks for priority `Job`.

>    2. If nothing is in priority, picks the next not sampled range for `Job`

Reviewer 2: I do not fully understand this. So the next job is not the job with the next highest priority but priority is a binary property instead? Like either a job "is priority" or not?

Author: It was unclear so I've improved explanation by adding data type of priority - stack. Coordinator will pick jobs from priority until there is none.

3. Launches new `Worker` with formed `Job`.

> 4. `Worker` gets headers for given ranges and sample shares.

Reviewer 4: Proposal: Can we point to the file where we have const values for range(now it's 100)?

Reviewer: The constants will change soon, and also, it's not a good practice for documents to point to the code.

Reviewer 4: > The constants will change soon, and also, it's not a good practice for documents to point to the code.

True. Still putting down this in a note section that this is followed up in XYZ and for now the consts are placed in ABC will help a lot

Author: I think this should come with config documentation when params become configurable, not in ADR.

> 1. `Coordinator` checks if worker concurrency limit is reached.
> 2. If limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms new sampling `Job`
>    1. Looks for priority `Job`.
>    2. If nothing in priority, picks next not sampled range for `Job`
> 3. Launches new `Worker` with formed `Job`.
> 4. `Worker` gets headers for given ranges and samples shares.
> 5. After `Worker` is done it communicates results back to `Coordinator`
> 6. `Coordinator` updates sampling state according to worker results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `Coordinator` checks if worker concurrency limit is reached.
2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`
   1. Looks for priority `Job`.
   2. If nothing is in priority, picks the next not sampled range for `Job`
3. Launches new `Worker` with formed `Job`.
4. `Worker` gets headers for given ranges and sample shares.
5. After `Worker` is done, it communicates results back to `Coordinator`
6. `Coordinator` updates sampling state according to worker results.
```

2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`
   1. Looks if there is a `Job` in the top of the priority stack.
   2. If nothing is in the priority stack, picks the next not sampled range for `Job`.
3. Launches new `Worker` with formed `Job`.
4. `Worker` gets headers for given ranges and sample shares.
5. After `Worker` is done, it communicates results back to `Coordinator`
6. `Coordinator` updates sampling state according to worker results.

## Concurrency limit

The maximum amount of concurrently running workers is defined by the const `concurrencyLimit` = 16. This value is an approximation that came from the first basic performance tests.
During the test, samples/sec rate was observed with moving average over 30 sec window for a period of 5min. The metric was triggered only by a sampled header with width > 2.

```text
amount of workers: 8, speed: 8.66

amount of workers: 16, speed: 11.13

amount of workers: 32, speed: 11.33

amount of workers: 64, speed: 11.83
```

Based on basic experiment results, values higher than 16 don’t bring much benefit. At the same time, increased parallelization comes with a cost of higher memory consumption.  

> Future improvements will discussed later and are out of scope of this ADR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future improvements will be discussed later and are out of the scope of this ADR.
```

# ADR #012: DASer parallelization

## Changelog

- 2022-9-12: Started

## Authors

@walldiss

## Context

DAS is the process of verifying the availability of

> block data by sampling chunks or shares of those blocks. The `das` package implements an engine to continuously ensure the availability of the chain's block data via the `Availability` interface.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
block data by sampling chunks or shares of those blocks. The `das` package implements an engine to ensure the availability of the chain's block data via the `Availability` interface.
```

`continuously` sounds like we request the same height frequently over some period of time

1. `Coordinator` holds current state of sampled headers and defines what headers should be sampled next.
2. `Workers` perform sampling over a range of headers and communicate results back to the coordinator. Workers are created on demand, only if there is available `Jobs`. The amount of concurrently running workers is limited by const `concurrencyLimit`.  
3. `Subscriber` subscribes to updates of network head. If a new head is found, it will notify the `Coordinator`. Recent network head blocks will be prioritized for sampling to increase the availability of the most demanded blocks.
4. `CheckpointStore` stores/loads`Coordinator` state as a checkpoint to allow seamless resume upon restart. `Coordinator` will store the state as a checkpoint on the exit and will resume sampling from the latest state.
It also periodically stores checkpoint to storage to avoid situation when checkpoint is not stored upon node hard shutdown.

![image](./img/daser-architecture-diagram.png)

Sampling flow:

1. `Coordinator` checks if worker concurrency limit is reached.
2. If the limit is not reached, `Coordinator` forms a new sampling `Job`

>    1. Looks if there is a `Job` in the top of priority stack.
>    2. If nothing is in priority stack, picks the next not sampled range for `Job`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   1. Looks if there is a `Job` in the top of the priority stack.
   2. If nothing is in the priority stack, picks the next not sampled range for `Job`
```

3. Launches new `Worker` with formed `Job`.
4. `Worker` gets headers for given ranges and sample shares.
5. After `Worker` is done, it communicates results back to `Coordinator`
6. `Coordinator` updates sampling state according to worker results.

## Concurrency limit

> Maximum amount of concurrently running workers is defined by const `concurrencyLimit` = 16. The value for const is the first approximation that came from basic performance tests.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The maximum amount of concurrently running workers is defined by the const `concurrencyLimit` = 16. This value is an approximation that came from the first basic performance tests.
```

During the test, samples/sec rate was observed with moving average over 30 sec window for period of 5min. The metric was triggered only by sampled header with width > 2.

```text
amount of workers: 8, speed: 8.66

amount of workers: 16, speed: 11.13

amount of workers: 32, speed: 11.33

amount of workers: 64, speed: 11.83
```

> Based on basic experiment results values higher than 16 don’t bring much benefit. On the same time increased parallelization comes with a cost of higher memory consumption.  

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Based on basic experiment results, values higher than 16 don’t bring much benefit. At the same time, increased parallelization comes with a cost of higher memory consumption.  
```

Future improvements discussed later.

## Status

Implemented

## Future plans

> Several params values that come hardcoded in DASer (`samplingRange`, `concurrencyLimit`, `priorityQueueSize`, `genesisHeight`, `backgroundStoreInterval`) should become configurable so node runner can define them based on the specific node setup. Default values should be optimized by performance testing for most common setups and potentially could vary for different node types.  

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Several params values that come hardcoded in DASer (`samplingRange`, `concurrencyLimit`, `priorityQueueSize`, `genesisHeight`, `backgroundStoreInterval`) should become configurable so the node runner can define them based on the specific node setup. Default values should be optimized by performance testing for most common setups and could potentially vary for different node types.  
```
